Instruction Set Architecture(ISA) or Architecture - family of CPUs(Processors) who supports same instructions.
e.g. x86, x86_64(amd64), arm, arm64, sparc, ppc(Power PC), mips, risc-v

init systems supported - choose one.
1. OpenRC (Gentoos own)
2. systemd

choose a file system.

can choose or remove features from system-wide level or package level or package group level using USE flags.

gentoo avoids forcing users onto a specific system profile or desktop environment.

The entire operating system can be tuned at a binary level via the mechanisms included in Portage's make.conf file

init system - the first process that starts when linux computer boots up and this process starts all the other processes. always has the id of 1.
- initializes hardwares and mounts file systems.
- initializes other services like logging, networking, UI..
- monitors and restarts services if they fail.
- handles system shutdown and reboots.

init system is what starts after BIOS/UEFI but before we login to our linux.

systemd
-------
more than just an init system.
de facto standard on many linux distributions today.
uses unit files.
introduces cgroups management - for resource isolation and managment, socket activation - for on-demand service starting, D-Bus integration.

systemctl - command line tool for all aspects of system.
binary log format - Journalctl

wheel group
-----------
wheel means power users or priviledged users
in some other distributions it can be referred in other names.(sudo group in linux mint, admin group for legacy reasons)
why - security mechanism to allow users to perform commands on behalf of the root user.(run commands as root)

refer: /etc/sudoers

%wheel ALL=(ALL) ALL - means all the users in the wheel group can sudo commands as root.
    
sudo usermod -aG sudo(or wheel) user_name -> appends the user to sudo or wheel group	
sudo usermod -G sudo(or wheel) user_name -> adds the user to sudo or wheel group and removes the users from other groups (don't do this)

kernel
------
- talks to the hardware
- manages resources (CPU, memory..)
- making sure apps don't crash into each other 

basically bridge and controller between software/apps and hardware. (apps needs to access hardware and vice versa)

software -> hardware
hardware -> software

kernel does
Process management     | Keeps track of running programs, schedules CPU time 
Memory management      | Allocates and reclaims RAM                          
Device management      | Talks to devices: keyboard, mouse, GPU, etc.        
File system management | Opens, reads, writes files                          
Security & Permissions | Prevents apps from accessing things they shouldn’t  

custom kernel
-------------

can tweak, strip down, optmize kernel for our hardware
in most other distros we get a bloated one-size-fits-all kernel(designed to work on every machine)

boot process
------------

1. BIOS/UEFI starts the hardware(RAM, CPU, Storage..)
2. Bootloader(e.g. GRUB) loads the linux kernel into memory(passes parameters if needed) and gives control to the kernel.
3. Kernel then initializes memory management, process scheduler, device drivers...., mounts the root file system and then launches the init system
4. Init system starts other processes(networking, login managment, graphical sessions...)

refer
----

BIOS vs UEFI
partition table styles(GPT, MBR...)
